---
title: Creation
---

Tags: Theurgia, Ability, NQW, Debuff, Utility

**Quanta Cost**: Ø  
**M**: Standard  
**R**: Ø  
**M**: Ø  
**Shaping Time:** 1 Action  
**Duration:** 1 minute, Concentration  
**Range:** Special

Tapping into the powers of creation beheld to the divine, you can create objects out of magic. 

The basic use of this ability is to create a solid object made out of vegetable matter in your hands. Vegetable matter means materials made from or of plants—wood, industrial hemp, vegetable wax, cotton, paper, and so on. 

This object cannot have a volume greater than .8 m<sup>3</sup> (Tiny). 

When your Quanta Pool is 5, that increases to 1.5 m<sup>3</sup> (Small); at 11, 3 m<sup>3</sup> (Medium); at 17, 4.5 m<sup>3</sup> (Large). 

If you cannot hold it, it appears in a nearby, unoccupied space no farther than 9 m away from you. 

You cannot create objects that have special properties (rare herbs needed for a powerful working or prophecy), nor can you create objects that you have no knowledge of (the key to a lock you didn’t make). You cannot create objects that require alchemy (chemical synthesis), brewing, or similar procedures. 

Creating simple objects, like chairs, candles or clubs is easy. However, creating complex objects, like objects with moving parts, is a test of spatial reasoning and mechanical knowledge. There is uncertainty as if you were crafting that object. If you fail, it comes into existence non-functional.

While these objects are not magical, they possess a quantic fingerprint, and thus can be detected as being the result of magic. Vendors will likely check for magically created materials if they are valuable enough, and reject them.

**Augment (1 Q):** You can create an object two volumes larger than you already can. If you already can create Large objects, your maximum volume is 8 m<sup>3</sup>. 

**Augment (2 Q):** You no longer require concentration. You can choose this augment even after this ability has been Shaped.

# Creation Extensions

## Additional Materials

**Augment (1 Q):** You are able to create objects out of any solid material that is not harmful, doesn’t have any special properties, and is not especially durable and/or valuable. For example, glass, bone, or ice. You are also able to create harmless liquids, like water, dye, or ink. However, you cannot create gasses, and you cannot create (unprocessed) flesh—tallow, vellum and leather are fine. 

As your Quanta Pool grows, you get access to more resilient and rare materials. 

| Quanta Pool Size | Materials |
| :---- | :---- |
| 1 | Stone |
| 5 | Common metals (iron, steel, copper); Harmless gasses (air, nitrogen, helium) |
| 11 | Precious metals (gold, silver); Semi-precious materials (jet, fur, amber, horn, crystal) |
| 17 | Gems |

## (Al)chemical Synthesis

**Augment (1 Q):** You can create an object that requires alchemy (chemical synthesis), such as basic poisons, acid, antitoxin, alcohol, gunpowder, and so on, as allowed by the setting. You cannot create magical objects with this extension, such as potions. You can create liquids with this extension, but only as needed to create alchemical items—not water or olive oil, for example. If you are able to make gasses with Creation via the Additional Materials extension, you may make gasses that would require alchemy (chemistry) and are harmful. 

## Fine Detail

You are able to make intricate and complex objects with less effort and uncertainty. Even if you do not know how to craft particular objects (woodworking, smithing, etc.) you are considered as being able to. If you already are, you are twice as proficient at creating them with magic.

## Food and Drink

**Augment (1 Q):** You can create enough food and drink to sustain a number of human-sized creatures equal to your Quanta Cap for a day. Doing so takes 10 minutes to Shape, instead of an Action. The duration of Creation for this instance is considered to be Instantaneous. Therefore, the food is non-magical and permanently created.

The food created by this use of Creation is bland, but nourishing. If you also possess the Fine Detail extension, you can create food of any quality, but are subject to the rules of creating complex objects.

**Augment (1 Q):** This use of Creation has a Shaping Time of 1 Action.

## Multitudes

You are able to make multiple objects, so long as they are of materials you can create, and they fit within your maximum volume. These objects do not need to be the same. An example of this would be a quiver and arrows or a row of candles. 

## Restraining Creations

**Augment (1 Q):** You may create a non-harmful object directly on a being, but they may be able to dodge it. These could be manacles, rope, or something else that restrains but does not deal direct damage. 

### Drawbacks

## Limited to One

You can only create objects with a single fragile solid material as described in the Expanded Materials extension. You cannot take the Expanded Materials extension. 

You gain an additional extension for Creation.
