---
title: talk nerdy to me
date: 2025-01-25
tags: magic
---

# how the magic system actually works

## BIG WARNING HOLD ONTO YOUR TITS

Magic is meant to have a sense of wonder and mystery to it, as mentioned in the earlier documentation that you've (hopefully) read. 

You should keep in mind that characters might not know all of this below. People who work magic might not know how it works. 

## Sources and Shapers

There’s two basic parts of any magical working, the Shaper and the Source. Here, a magical working is any sort of magic that happens. It could be a spell that’s been cast, an item being infused with magic, a minor expression of magical ability, so on.

The Source is anything that provides the raw magical ‘power’ (both in the physics definition of the rate of energy change / transfer, and in the common definition of energy and might). 

The Shaper is whatever takes the power and turns it into a working—a change upon the world. 

For example, a wand with a magic crystal in it would be both a Shaper and Source if the wand, in some way, aided another Shaper, or if it produced a magical working upon being activated in some way.

Thus, a Shaper could either be an inanimate object, or a living being. 

## Components 

Living Shapers need to fulfill the metaphysical, ritual, and material components of a working in order for it to happen.

**Metaphysical Components**: Connection with a Source, the Source’s power, one’s skill with magic, the ability and resilience to shape the amount of power they access, etc. 

**Ritual Components**: Whatever the shaper needs to actually do to perform the working. Crushing a black pearl, speaking backwards from a profane codex, outstretching one’s hand, viewing the target, and so on.

**Material Components**: Whatever physical things are needed for a working. Some living Sources want offerings, and some spells require a piece of their target.

### Examples of Sources

- Living Sources
    - The Ones Who Lurk are a prime example of this. They are potent magic-users themselves, but often make deals with people, or gift people, and become a Source. (The Ones can be considered people, but here, ‘people’ means people excluding the Ones.)
    - One might argue nature is one, but that’s going to be its own category.
    - Some people just are Sources. This is rare. 
    - Innately magical beings naturally fulfill the metaphysical, ritual, and material components to their existence, and, thus, are Sources.
- Nature
   - Pretty self explanatory. The magic power accessible from nature is proportional to the individual Shaper’s connection to nature, and the density of nature around them.
   - But as nature lets itself be changed, so too does it change its Shaper.
- Artificial Sources
   - While they are often thought of as a modern invention, they’ve been around for a long time. 
   - A witch might condense magic power into an object, so they might be able to use that power later, or in a place where nature is less present.
   - However, newer techniques allow magic power to be crystalized, or otherwise stored.
   - Unless some kind of reaction causes this power to be generated, these Sources are temporary

## Quanta

A Quantum (plural: ‘quanta’) is the base unit of power gathered from a Source. 

Quanta are discrete (in the form of integers), in that they are a self-contained package, a quantity.

1 Quantum is always 1 Quantum, and there is no such thing as ½ Quanta. 

Any excess not used by the working is harmlessly dissipated, such as in bright light, glowing runes; any power needed that would not cost another Quantum is gathered from the environment—a drop in a room’s temperature, a mage’s bodily energy (calories) being used, and so on.

## Quanta in Practice

**Quanta Pools** are one way to say ‘the total amount of Quanta a Shaper has access to at a given moment.’ What a mouthful. Let’s just use Quanta Pools. Later on, there might be other, culture or subculture-appropriate names for ‘em.

A Shaper’s **Quanta Cap** or **maximum expended Quanta** (**MEQ**) is how much Quanta they can spend on one working (spell, ability, etc). It is separate from the size of their Quanta Pool. 

For example, a Shaper with a Quanta Pool of 5/5 and a Quanta Cap of 3 could only shape workings that have a cost of 3 Q or lower, even if they have 5 Quanta available to use. 

**Nil Quanta Workings** (**NQWs**) are workings that, by their nature, cost no Quanta. All required power can be gathered from their surroundings (mostly thermal energy from the environment, and the chemical energy of a living Shaper, if applicable). However, these can still have some restrictions, as we’ll see below. NQWs are often versatile or useful.

**Tricks** are a subset of Nil Quanta Workings. They are virtually harmless, and don’t have as much effect as other NQWs. However, they don’t have much of any restrictions in terms of mechanics. Anyone can just learn them, much like you could learn a ‘magic’ trick right now. 

I know all of you have been dying to know about how Nil Quanta Workings are restricted, and how the Quanta Pools and Caps actually come into play. Let’s go into some averages for different kinds of Shapers and Sources. Note that these are, again, *averages*. Outside of these templates, the most variable thing is the number of Nil Quanta Workings known.

**Initiate or Non-Mage:**
 - 2 Nil Quanta Workings known
 - Quanta Pool: 1
 - Quanta Cap: 1
This level of magic is for anyone who picks up magic outside of becoming a magic-user. This isn’t the level of a mage-knight who blends magic and martial technique. That’d be higher. Rather, a sage or scholar who learns a little magic might be here. Someone who just picks up some, and doesn’t go further would be here.

**Apprentice:**
 - 2 to 3 NQWs known, 4 for an innate Source
 - Quanta Pool: 2 to 3
 - Quanta Cap: 1
This is the lowest level for those who actually delve into the study / practice / acquisition of magical ability. Even children can be at this level. 

**Tier 1:**
 - 2 to 3 NQWs known, 4 for an innate Source
 - Quanta Pool: 2 to 4
 - Quanta Cap: 1 to 2
This category includes apprentices. Note that people will probably *not* use the term ‘tier’ in-universe. This is a rough estimate of people who are still novices, but still set apart from the broader populace by virtue of their extraordinary abilities. Any threats they face would be on the scale of homesteads and villages.

**Tier 2:**
 - 4 to 5 NQWs known, 5 to 6 for an innate Source
 - Quanta Pool: 5 to 10
 - Quanta Cap: 3 to 5
These are fully-fledged mages, and the most powerful of those who blend magical and physical might. This is where many ‘classic’ spells are first employed. Threats they’d face are on the scale of cities or kingdoms.

**Mage:**
 - 4 NQWs known
 - Quanta Pool: 9
 - Quanta Cap: 5
This is a very specific subset of Tier 2. While any dedicated / serious / professional Shaper might be called a mage, this is the kind you’re likely to see operating as an ‘adventurer’. If you want a mage NPC, without too much nuance in the choice of statistics—this is where you go.

**Tier 3:**
- 5 NQWs known, 6 for an innate Source
- Quanta Pool: 11 to 16
- Quanta Cap: 6 to 8
This is where Shapers become special among their kind, and many get access to reality-altering workings. Threats of their scale might confront entire regions. 

**Tier 4:**
 - 5 NQWs known, 6 for an innate Source
 - Quanta Pool: 17-20
 - Quanta Cap: 9
This is the point where Shapers start to become archetypal, and approach the peak of mortal power. Threats for them might be global, or extend into other planes of existence.

**Artificial Sources and Shapers:**

So far, when I referred to a Shaper, I was talking about a living one.
Most consumable or rechargeable artificial Sources (potions, crystals) have a Quanta Pool of 1 to 5
Artificial Shapers that hold ‘charges’ of a spell or ability have a Quanta Cap appropriate to what they have stored, and a Quanta Pool that is sufficient for the number of ‘charges’ the item holds.

**The Ones Who Lurk:**

To sustain Shapers, they must have a very large Quanta Pool—more than the overwhelming majority of mortals—even if they are sustained by nature. However, they follow inscrutable plans, so playing one is not a free ticket to magical godhood—and they’d probably be stripped of power, ufufu~!





