---
title: Bewitch
---

Tags: Noetia, Ability

**Quanta Cost**: Ø  
**M**: Standard  
**R**: Ø  
**M**: Ø  
**Shaping Time:** 1 Action  
**Duration:** varies  
**Range:** 9 m

You place mind-affecting magic over a creature. This creature must be of the same type as you, but not necessarily the same species. For example, a wolffolk mage could use Bewitch on a human target, but not on an actual wolf (mortal, but not humanoid), nor on One Who Lurks (humanoid, but not mortal. The Expanded Mind Extension removes this restriction. 

Note that Bewitch is able to be resisted. The more powerful the Shaper, the more difficult it is to resist Bewitch. Unless otherwise noted, the target gets one chance to resist, which upon the Shaping of Bewitch.

Different aspects of one’s mind bear more on resisting different kinds of mind-affecting magic. 

They will be abbreviated with the following shorthand:

**W:** Willpower, attunement to the world around you, resistance to duplicity  
**I:** Intellect, recognition of fakes  
**C:** Power to assert your identity, force of personality

For instance, a very intelligent but foolish person could easily disbelieve a visual illusion implanted into their mind, but be powerless before induced sleep.

Most Extensions for Bewitch give it a specific effect, which *cannot* be Shaped without having that Extension. 

To use the 2 Q Augments of an Extension, you must have the Empowered Mind Extension.

When you gain the Bewitch Ability, take one Extension for it.

# Bewitch Extensions

## Amnesia

**Duration:** Instantaneous  
**What Resists?** W

You erase approximately 6 seconds of the target’s memory. A reminder of what happened grants the target another chance to resist.

**Augment (1 Q):** You erase up to the last 10 minutes of the target’s memory. Alternatively, the target forgets a single person, place, item, or event. This event may not last longer than 10 minutes.

**Augment (2 Q):** You erase up to the last week of the target’s memory, entirely, or only partially.

## Calm

**Duration:** 1 minute, Concentration  
**What Resists?** C

You suppress strong emotions in your target, whether they be violent rage or revelrous joy. These include magic-induced fear, or magical effects that affect mood.

Note that these effects are suppressed, and will return upon the end of Calm’s duration, unless they’ve expired before that.

Any aggressive behavior (Shaping a harmful Working), or violence towards the target causes Calm to end early.

**Augment (1 Q):** In addition to the above, the target loses all desire to engage in activities of extreme emotion—fighting, revelling—for the duration. However, the target can defend itself normally, such as moving out of harm’s way. Any effects that would be suppressed cannot be initiated, as well.

**Augment (2 Q):** In addition to the above, the target loses all will to act. They are suffused with an overwhelming serenity.

## Charm

**Duration:** 1 minute, Concentration  
**What Resists?** W

The target regards you as a friend. They cannot willingly attack you. If you or your allies are attacking or threatening the target, they can resist Charm more easily. 

**Augment (1 Q):** The duration is 1 hour, without concentration.

**Augment (2 Q):** The duration is 8 hours, without concentration.

# Work In Progress
